pc-parse-src-20030320				March 20, 2003
pc-parse-doc-20030320
pc-parse-tst-20030320

These archives include sources, documentation, and test data for the following
natural language processing / computational linguistics programs:

		PC-Kimmo version 2.1.13
		PC-PATR version 1.3.8
		KTEXT version 2.1.8
		KTAGGER version 1.0.10
		AMPLE version 3.6.5
		ANADIFF version 1.0.6
		INTERGEN version 2.1b16
		STAMP version 2.1.16
		ToneGen version 1.0b12
		TonePars version 1.0.11

along with required function libraries.  The sources and documentation are all
stored in the subdirectory pc-parse-20030320.  (Note that the documentation
stored in the doc subdirectory has not been kept up to date.  It may still be
useful as a starting point, however.)

The file INSTALL describes how to compile and install the pc-parse programs on
a Unix (or Unix-like) system.  Minimally, you need to enter only two commands:

		% ./configure
		% make install

The build process has been tested on the following systems:

  1. Debian GNU/Linux 2.2 (kernel 2.2.17) / gcc 2.95.2, glibc 2.1.3-24
  2. Red Hat Linux 7.3 (kernel 2.4.18) / gcc 2.96, glibc 2.2.5-34
  3. Red Hat Linux 8.0 (kernel 2.4.18-14) / gcc 3.2-7, glibc 2.2.93-5
  4. OpenBSD 3.1 / gcc 2.95.3
  5. cygwin 1.3.10-1 (Windows XP Pro) / gcc 2.95.3-5

Unfortunately, these are all Intel Pentium family CPU based systems, but this
set of programs should compile and work on any Unix like system.  (If not, let
us know!)

The file INSTALL.DOS describes how to compile and install the pc-parse
programs on MS-DOS or MS Windows using either the DJGPP port of the GNU C
compiler or Microsoft Visual C/C++ (version 6 or 7).  Other C compilers may
work, but have not been tested.  An archive containing precompiled executables
and documentation for these programs should be available from the same place
as where you got the sources.


GETTING STARTED WITH PC-KIMMO
-----------------------------

Here are instructions for trying out PC-KIMMO with Englex, a PC-KIMMO
description of English morphology (rules, lexicon, grammar).  Englex is in the
pckimmo/test/eng subdirectory.

After getting the englex archive and unpacking it, go to the englex
subdirectory and edit the file englex.tak.  Fix the file paths for your local
system using either absolute or relative paths.  Here is one strategy: move
the englex.tak file out of the Englex subdirectory into the directory just
above it and modify the paths like this:

		load rules englex/english.rul
		load lexicon englex/english.lex
		load grammar englex/english.grm

Launch PC-KIMMO and at the prompt type:

		take englex

(The Take command expects .tak as the default file extension.)

Now use the Recognize command to recognize (parse) words.  For example, at the
prompt type:

		recognize foxes

The command keyword "recognize" can be shortened to "r".  Better, at the
prompt type "recognize" (or "r") and press return.  A special "recognizer"
prompt will appear.  Now you can keep typing words without repeating the
"recognize" command.  Note: use only lower case letters and no punctuation
(except apostrophe and hyphen).



GETTING STARTED WITH PC-PATR
----------------------------

Here are instructions for trying out PC-PATR with the supplied toy English
grammar.

The directory doc/pcpatr/english contains a toy English sentence grammar and
lexicon.  This grammar can also be used with Englex, a morphological
description of English for PC-KIMMO (see above).  Englex will provide a
morphological parse of words on the fly, thus building up a word lexicon as
you parse sentences.  Note that you do not have to have the stand-alone
PC-KIMMO executable in order to use Englex with PC-PATR; PC-KIMMO is built
into PC-PATR.

Go to the doc/pcpatr/english subdirectory and start PC-PATR:

		% cd doc/pcpatr/english
		% pcpatr
		PC-PATR>take english

(The Take command expects .tak as the default file extension.)

Now use the Parse command to parse sentences.  For example, at the prompt
type:

		PC-PATR>parse uther stormed cornwall

The command keyword "parse" can be shortened to "p".  Better, at the prompt
type "parse" (or "p") and press return.  A special "parse" prompt will appear.
Now you can keep typing sentences without repeating the "parse" command.
Note: use only lower case letter and no punctuation (except apostrophe and
hyphen inside words).  Try sentences such as these (but remember that you are
limited to words that are in the lexicon):

		uther sleeps
		the knights sleep
		uther storms cornwall
		the brave knights have stormed cornwall
		i sleep
		he sleeps
		he was sleeping
		he slept
		he has slept
		i see him
		he sees me
		i was seen
		i was seen by him
		i was seen by him clearly
		i saw the man with a telescope
		the tall man on the hill saw me with a telescope
		i saw uther before he stormed cornwall



USING PC-PATR WITH ENGLEX
-------------------------

Obtain Englex from the URL given above and install it.  Go to the
doc/pcpatr/english subdirectory under PC-PATR and edit the file english2.tak.
Fix the take file for your system by modifying the file paths for your local
system.

		% emacs english2.tak
			or
		% vi english2.tak

Fix the first three lines starting with "load kimmo" so that they point to the
Englex files.  For example, if the englex subdirectory is on the same level as
the doc and src subdirectories the default paths would be okay:

		load kimmo rules   ../../../englex/english.rul
		load kimmo lexicon ../../../englex/english.lex
		load kimmo grammar ../../../englex/english.grm

Note that the "kimmo mapping" file is found in the doc/pcpatr/english
directory:

		load kimmo mapping english2.map

Now you can parse sentences as described above.  The difference is that any
words you use which are not in the word lexicon (i.e. english.lex) are parsed
by Englex.  When you are done parsing sentences, you can save the modified
word lexicon using the "Save Lexicon" command.



Please send programming questions and feedback to:

	Steve McConnel                   |  e-mail: Stephen_McConnel@sil.org
	Language Software Development    |  phone:  972-708-7361
	SIL International
	7500 W. Camp Wisdom Road
	Dallas, TX 75236
